Welcome back.
We're now into the tree data structure section right over here.
And as we can see trees or linked lists are a type of a tree that we've already talked about but there's
a few others over here that we have yet to talk about.
So we're going to cover that and get familiar with the mean different types by starting off with binary
tree.
Let's get into it.
A binary tree is something you've likely seen before and it's a type a tree with a few rules that are
applied to it.
But they're quite straightforward each node can only have either 0 1 or 2 nodes and each child can only
have one parent.
This is a binary tree.
However this is not a binary tree because it has three children or at least one of the NOS has three
children.
And each node represents a certain state.
And this is very similar to what we've done in the past especially with linked lists if we take a look
at an example here.
In order for me to create a binary tree Well I can just create a function say binary tree and this binary
tree perhaps will get a value and the binary tree or in our case do a binary tree node will simply have
a this value associated with it which is the value that we give it inside of the function.
And then we have two other properties which is a pointer to the left side of the tree which for now
will be no.
And a pointer to the right side of the tree that is this that right equals
and that's it we can represent a binary tree node simply having a value and then a left and or right
property very similar to what we did.
Or a very similar principle to what we did with linked lists.
Now we're going to actually code a tree and create a tree data structure just like we have for past
data structures.
But I want to also point out a few terminology that we might come across and that are important.
In this case we're looking at something called a tree that is completely full.
That means there are no gaps in the tree.
Let me show you what I mean.
A perfect binary tree has everything filled in.
That means all the leaf nodes are full and there's no no that only has one child a node either has zero
children or two children.
And also the bottom layer of the tree is completely filled.
Nothing's missing versus a full binary tree which simply says that a node has either 0 or 2 children
but never one child.
Now why is this important.
Because this type of binary tree especially a perfect binary tree is really really efficient and something
that is desirable when binary trees are perfect like this they have two really interesting properties.
One is that the number of total nodes on each level doubles as we move down the tree.
For example here we have one node in the next level we have two.
So we've just doubled the nodes in the next level.
We have one two three four.
So we've doubled to do for if we had a nother level that's a perfect binary tree we'd have 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8.
So we were doubling every time.
The second important property is that the number of nodes on the last level is equal to the sum of the
number of nodes on all the other levels plus 1.
All right.
That was confusing what I mean.
Well here if I take the bottom level that is 1 2 3 for the second property states that all the nodes
above it plus 1 is going to equal the bottom level.
So one two three plus one equals four.
That is what we had on the bottom which means in other words that about half of our nodes are on the
last level.
And this brings up a really interesting point by organizing our data in this way.
We have half of this data in the bottom level.
If somehow we can avoid visiting every node even if the node we're looking for is at the very bottom
perhaps there is some efficiencies that we can have and you'd be right because of this type of structure
you're going to see a new notation of big-O something that we've been waiting for a long time old log
and and when we start talking about something called binary search trees you're going to start seeing
this notation.
Yes we finally got to another big O notation.
But what does it mean in the next video.
I want to talk about all log in and why trees allow us to have something like this.
And what the implications are.
I'll see in the next one.